Docs - testing of integration guides (#114)
kgateway-dev/kgateway.dev: content/docs/setup/customize/aws-elb/alb.md

---
title: AWS ALB
weight: 10
---

In this guide you explore how to expose the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/product-name.md" >}} proxy with an AWS application load balancer (ALB). 

{{< callout type="warning" >}}

> The AWS Load Balancer Controller only supports creation of an ALB through an Ingress Controller and not through the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/k8s-gateway-api-name.md" >}}. Because of this, you must create the ALB separately through an Ingress resource that connects it to the service that exposes your gateway proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The AWS Load Balancer Controller only supports the creation of an ALB through an Ingress Controller and not through the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/k8s-gateway-api-name.md" >}}. Because of this, you must create the ALB separately through an Ingress resource that connects it to the service that exposes your gateway proxy.
```

{{< /callout >}}

## Before you begin

1. Create or use an existing AWS account. 
2. Follow the [Get started guide](/docs/quickstart/) to install {{< reuse "docs/snippets/product-name.md" >}} and deploy the httpbin sample app. You do not need to set up a Gateway as you create a custom Gateway as part of this guide. 
   

> ## Step 1: Deploy gateway proxy resources

Reviewer: do we still have the steps to deploy the AWS LB controller?

Author: yes, in the conref on line 103

> 1. Create a Gateway resource with an HTTP listener.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a Gateway resource with an HTTP listener. You later pair this Gateway with an AWS ALB. 
```

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -n {{< reuse "docs/snippets/ns-system.md" >}} -f- <<EOF
   kind: Gateway
   apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
   metadata:
     name: alb
   spec:
     gatewayClassName: kgateway
     listeners:
     - protocol: HTTP
       port: 8080
       name: http
       allowedRoutes:
         namespaces:
           from: All
   EOF
   ```

> 2. Create DirectResponse and HTTPRoute resources to configure a healthcheck for the gateway. This step is required for AWS ELB health checks to pass. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create DirectResponse and HTTPRoute resources to configure a custom healthcheck path on the gateway. In this example, you expose the `/healthz` path and configure it to always return a 200 HTTP response code by using the DirectResponse. Later, you configure the ALB to perform the health check against the `/healthz` path to determine if the Gateway is healthy. 
```

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f- <<EOF
   apiVersion: gateway.kgateway.dev/v1alpha1
   kind: DirectResponse
   metadata:
     name: httpbin-healthcheck-dr
     namespace: httpbin
   spec:
     status: 200
   ---
   apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
   kind: HTTPRoute
   metadata:
     name: httpbin-healthcheck
     namespace: httpbin
     labels:
       example: httpbin-route
   spec:
     parentRefs:
       - name: alb
         namespace: {{< reuse "docs/snippets/ns-system.md" >}}
     rules:
     - matches:
       - path:
           type: Exact
           value: /healthz
       filters:
       - type: ExtensionRef
         extensionRef:
          name: httpbin-healthcheck-dr
          group: gateway.kgateway.dev
          kind: DirectResponse
   EOF
   ```

> 3. Create an HTTPRoute resource to configure to open up a port for the `albtest.com` hostname on the gateway proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Create another HTTPRoute resource to expose the httpbin app on the `albtest.com` domain. 
```

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f- <<EOF
   apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
   kind: HTTPRoute
   metadata:
     name: httpbin-alb
     namespace: httpbin
     labels:
       example: httpbin-route
   spec:
     parentRefs:
       - name: alb
         namespace: {{< reuse "docs/snippets/ns-system.md" >}}
     hostnames:
       - "albtest.com"
     rules:
     - matches:
       - path:
           type: PathPrefix
           value: /
       backendRefs:
       - name: httpbin
         port: 8000
   EOF
   ```

## Step 2: Create an ALB with the AWS Load Balancer controller

{{< reuse "docs/snippets/aws-elb-controller-install.md" >}}

> 5. Use an Ingress resource to define your ALB. When you apply this resource, the AWS Load Balancer Controller creates the ALB in your account.

Reviewer: numbering is off. not sure if it shows on the actual page though

Reviewer: aaah ok that is explains why the gateway does not create an NLB up until this step :D

{{< callout type="warning" >}}
Keep in mind the following considerations when working with an ALB: 
* The AWS Load Balancer Controller only supports creation of an ALB through an Ingress Controller and not through the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/k8s-gateway-api-name.md" >}}. Because of this, you must create the ALB separately and later connect it to the service that exposes your gateway proxy.

> * Currently, {{< reuse "docs/snippets/product-name.md" >}} does not support support enabling health checks on the gateway. The default AWS ELB health checks are automatically created when you create the Gateway resource and might report that the gateway proxy is unhealthy, even if it is healthy.

Author: Summary for testing the ALB guide:
- Healthcheck in HTTPListenerPolicy is not yet supported, so I commented out steps for configuring that healthcheck throughout.
- You can still follow the rest of this guide just fine to create the ALB, but it'll show instances as unhealthy.
- I added this note here and later in the steps calling this out.

What do we think? Should this guide be published regardless of this issue, or should we continue to hide it until configuring custom healthchecks becomes supported?

Reviewer: without successful health checks, the ALB is not usable so I think we should not publish this guide. But I think we should make Lawrence aware of this issue so that they can decide what to do with it

Reviewer: hmm interesting. in the past, I was not able to use the ALB when the health checks were failing, but maybe that is because it was actually broken whereas in your case,  it is not broken, it just does not look nice

Reviewer: maybe let's ask about it in the kgateway-dev channel to see what we should do with it
